# CH 2 Building blocks

This chapter covers

- Using the interactive shell
- Working with variables
- Organizing your code
- Understanding the type system
- Working with Operators
- Understanding the runtime



##  Working with variables

Elixir is a dynamic programming language -> It doesn't explicitly declare a variable or its type. Instead, the variable is determined by whatever data it contains at the moment. In Elixir terms, assignment is called *binding*. 

```elixir
monthly_salary = 10000
```

In Elixir, a variable name always starts with a lowercase alphabetic -> In Erlang Variable start with uppercase

```Erlang
#Erlang
A = 100.

#Elixir
a = 100
```



Also variable name can be end with the question mark or exclamation mark characters.  

Variable names can be rebound to a different value.

```elixir
#Erlang
A = 100.
A = 110.
#Error

#Elixir
a = 100
a = 110
#Possible

```

Elixir is a ***garbage-collection language.***  



## Organizing your code

### 2.3.1 Modules

A modules is a collection of functions, somewhat like a namespace. Every Elixir function must be defined inside a module.

A module name must follow certain rules. It starts with an uppercase letter and is usually written in CamelCase style.



### 2.3.2 Functions ###

 As with variable, function names can end with the ? and ! characters. The ? character is often used to indicate a function that returns either true or false. Placing the character ! at the end of the name indicates a function that may raise a runtime error.-> Both of these are conventions, rather than rules.

 Function can be defined using the def macro

```elixir
demodul Geometry do
    def rectangle_area(a, b) do
    ...
	end
	
	def function_has_no_argument do
	...
	end
end	
```

 There is no explicit return in Elixir -> The return value of a function is the return value of its last expression.

```elixir
Geometry.rectangle(3,2)
Geometry.rectangle 3, 2

#Same expression
```

Elixir comes with a built-in operator, |>, called *pipeline operator*

```elixir
-5 |> abs() |> (Integer.to-string(abs(-5)))
```

Pipeline operator places the result of the previous call as the first argument of the next call. So the following code,

```elixir
prev(arg1, arg2) |> next(arg3, arg4)
#It means
next(prev(arg1, arg2), arg3, arg4)
```

***Multi-line pipelines don;t work in the shell***



### 2.3.3 Function arity ###

Arity is a fancy name of the number of arguments a function receives.

```elixir
defmodule Rectangle do
	def area(a), do: area(a,a)  %%Rectangle.area/1 -> 1 arity
	def area(a, b) do: a * b	%%Rectangle.area/2 -> 2 arity
```



```elixir
# Same-name functions, different arities, default params
defmodule Calculator do
    def sum(a) do
    	sum(a, 0)
    end
    
    def sum(a, b) do  
	    a + b
    end
end
```

A lower-arity function is implemented in terms of a higher-arity one, This pattern is so frequent that Elixir allows you to specify defaults for arguments by using the \ \\operaor followed by the ***argument's*** default value

```elixir
defmodule Clculator do
	def sum(a, b \\ 0) do
		a + b
	end
end
```

```elixir
defmodule MyModule do
	def fun(a, b \\ 1, c, d, \\ 2) do
		a + b + c + d
	end
end
```

>  Similar with argument of fun in C/C++ or other language
>
> But in Elixir, \\\ set default of ***multiple argument***



### 2.3.4 Function visibility ###

- def  : public function -> can be called by anyone else
- defp : A private function can be used inly inside the module it is defined in.    

```elixir
# Module with a public and a private function
defmodule TestPrivate do
    def double(a) do 		# Public function
        sum(a,b) 		# Calls the private function
    end

    defp sum(a,b) do		# Private function
        a + b
        end
    end    
```



### 2.3.5 Imports and aliases

Calling functions from another module can sometimes be cumbersome because it needs to reference the module name. Importing a module allows to call its public functions without prefixing them.



```elixir
defmodule MyModule do
	import IO
	
	def my_function do
		puts "Calling imported function"
		#IO:puts "Calling imported function"
	end
end
```



Of course, multiple modules can be imported. In fact, the standard library's *kernel* module is automatically imported into every module.

Another construct, *alias*, makes it possible to reference a module under a different name.

```elixir
def MyModule do
    alias IO, as MyIO
    
    def my_function do
    	MYIO.puts("calling imported function")
    end
end

```

```elixir
defmodule MyModule do
	alias Geometry.Rectangle, as: Rectangle
	
	def my_function do
		Rectangle.area(...)
	end
end
```



### 2.3.6 Module attribute

The purpose of module attribute is twofold: they can be used as compile-time constant, and you can register any attribute, which can then be queried in runtime.



```elixir
defmodule Circle do
	@pi 3.14156
	
	def area(r), do: r*r*@pi
	def circumference(r), do: 2*r*@pi
end
```

This is permitted and makes it possible to experiment without storing any files on disk.

The important thing about the @pi constant is that it exists only during the compilation of the module, when the references to it are inlined.



Moreover, attribute can be registered, which means it will be stored in the generated binary and can be accessed at runtime. Elixir registers some module attributes by default.

-> @moduledoc @doc can be used to provide documentation for modules and finctions



```elixir
defmodule Circle do
	@moduledoc "Implements basic circle functions"
	@pi 3.14159
	
	@doc "Computes the area of a circle"
	def area(r), do:r*r*@pi
	
	@doc Computes "the circoumference of a circle"
	def circumference(r), do: 2*r*r*@pi
end

#output
#iex(1)> Code.get_docs(Circle, :moduledoc)
#{1, "Implements basic circle functions"}

#output with help feature
#help feature is h
#iex(2)> h Circle			-> Circle
#Implements basic circle functions
#iex(3)> h Circle.area		-> def area(a)
#Computes the area of a circle

```



### Type specifications

Type specifications (often called *typespecs*) are another important feature based on attributes.

This feature allows you to provide type information for your functions, which can later be analyzed with a static analysis tool called dialyzer

```elixir
defmoducle Circle do
    @pi 3.14159
    @spec area(number) :: number			#Type specification for area/1
    def area(r), do : r*r*@pi
    
    @spec circumference(number) :: number
    def circumference(r), do: 2*r*@pi	#Type specification for circumference/1
end
```

*@spec* attribute to indicate that both functions accept and return a number

remember that Elixir is a dynamic language, so function inputs and output cannot be easily deduced by looking at the function's signature.  Typespecs can help significantly with this, and i can personally attest that it's much easier to understand someone else's code when typespces are provided.

```elixir
#example of typespecs
List.insert_at/3:
@spec insert_at(list, integer, any) :: list
```

> In this book, Writer will not use typespecs nut i have to practice by myself for a complex structure which i will implement.
>
> ... Really can i implement? T_T

